Captioning sponsored by
MacNEIL/LEHRER PRODUCTIONS
>> Ifill: IN OUR EXTENDED
CONVERSATION WITH SECRETARY OF
STATE JOHN KERRY.
>> I REFUSE TO GIVE UP.
THIS HASN'T GONE AWAY IN 40, 50
YEARS, AND IT'S NOT GOING TO
SUDDENLY JUST SORT OF SOLVE
ITSELF BY ITSELF.
THAT'S OUR IS TO TRY TO PUSH THE
PROCESS FORWARD.
>> Ifill: GOOD EVENING, I'M GWEN
IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF, ALSO AHEAD THIS
THURSDAY.
MOUNTING CALLS FROM BOTH
PARTIES, FOR VETERANS AFFAIRS
SECRETARY ERIC SHINSEKI TO
RESIGN.
AFTER A PROBE POINTED TO
SYSTEMIC PROBLEMS IN THE V.A.
HEALTH CARE SYSTEM ACROSS THE
COUNTRY.
>> Ifill: PLUS, THE SWEEPING
PUBLIC HEALTH TRANSFORMATION IN
RWANDA.
WHERE AID GROUPS AND TRAINED
HEALTH WORKERS ARE OVERCOMING A
SHORTAGE OF DOCTORS, WHILE STILL
ACHIEVING DRAMATIC RESULTS.
>> Reporter: THE NUMBER OF
CHILDREN DYING BEFORE AGE FIVE
HAS DROPPED TO A QUARTER OF WHAT
IT WAS IN THE YEAR 2,000.
THE NUMBER MOTHERS WHO DIE IN
CHILDBIRTH IS DOWN 66% SINCE
1990.
>> Ifill: THOSE ARE JUST SOME OF
THE STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS "NEWSHOUR."
>> Woodruff: UKRAINE'S MILITARY
SUFFERED A BLOW TODAY WHEN PRO-
RUSSIAN REBELS SHOT DOWN A
HELICOPTER, KILLING AT LEAST 12
PEOPLE, INCLUDING A GENERAL.
A PLUME OF SMOKE COULD BE SEEN
RISING ABOVE THE WRECKAGE NEAR
SLOVYANSK.
UKRAINIAN OFFICIALS SAID REBELS
USED A PORTABLE ANTI-AIRCRAFT
ROCKET TO BRING DOWN THE
HELICOPTER.
MEANWHILE, RUSSIA DEMANDED AGAIN
THAT UKRAINE'S GOVERNMENT CALL
OFF ITS MILITARY CAMPAIGN.
>> Ifill: IT'S BACK TO SQUARE
ONE IN THE HUNT FOR A MALAYSIAN
AIRLINER THAT VANISHED MARCH
8TH, WITH 239 PEOPLE ON BOARD.
OFFICIALS ANNOUNCED TODAY
THEY'VE FINISHED SEARCHING 330
SQUARE MILES OF THE INDIAN OCEAN
SEABED OFF WESTERN AUSTRALIA,
AND THERE'S NO SIGN OF THE
WRECKAGE.
AND, IT TURNS OUT, THEY'VE BEEN
LOOKING IN THE WRONG PLACE.
PAUL DAVIES OF INDEPENDENT
TELEVISION NEWS FILED THIS
REPORT.
>> Reporter: IT WAS THEIR MOST
PROMISING LEAD.
SIGNALS THOUGHT TO COME FROM THE
MISSING PLANE'S BLACK BOX
RECORDER.
SPECIALIST EQUIPMENT ON UNMANNED
SUBMARINES COULD TRACE THE
SOURCE, THEY HOPED.
THE U.S. NAVY HAS HAD TO ACCEPT
THAT MH370 DOES NOT LIE HERE.
THE UNDERWATER SEARCH WAS
CARRIED OUT BY A VESSEL DRAGGING
A TOWED PINGER LOCATOR.
FOUR SEPARATE ACOUSTIC PINGS
HAVE BEEN HEARD, AT FIRST
BELIEVED TO BE FROM THE PLANE'S
BLACK BOX RECORDER.
BUT ANALYSIS NOW SUGGESTS THEY
DIDN'T COME FROM THE PLANE'S
WRECKAGE AT ALL.
SOME EXPERTS BELIEVE THE SOURCE
OF THE PINGS COULD IN FACT BE
THE SEARCH VESSEL ITSELF OR ITS
UNDERWATER EQUIPMENT.
SOMETHING THAT SHOULD HAVE BEEN
CHECKED EARLIER, THIS EXPERT
SAYS.
>> HUGE ADMISSION.
HUGE ADMISSION FOR THEM TO HAVE
DONE THAT.
IT'S VERY HARD TO BELIEVE THEY
HADN'T AND SO WE'LL WAIT AND SEE
AS THIS STORY CONTINUES WHAT THE
FINAL SAY IS FROM THE COMPANY
BUT YOU WOULD HAVE CERTAINLY
EXPECTED THEM TO DO THAT BEFORE
THEY PUT IT IN THE WATER IN THE
INDIAN OCEAN.
>> Reporter: IT IS THE LATEST
DISASTROUS NEWS FOR RELATIVES
LIKE DANIKA WEEKS WHOSE HUSBAND
PAUL IS ONE OF 239 PASSENGERS
AND CREW WHOSE FATE REMAINS
UNKNOWN.
>> IT'S JUST ANOTHER SLAP IN THE
FACE.
IT'S JUST ANOTHER LONG ROAD FOR
US AND LOOK I'M JUST, I'M
SHATTERED BY THE NEWS.
I'M ABSOLUTELY SHATTERED.
>> Reporter: THIS PHASE OF THE
SEARCH ENDS HERE.
IT WILL BE RESUMED AND EXPANDED
IN AUGUST WITH THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT SAYING IT'S STILL
CONFIDENT THAT IN TIME FLIGHT
MH370's FINAL RESTING PLACE WILL
BE LOCATED.
PAUL DAVIES, ITV NEWS.
>> Ifill: THE MOVE WILL BE TO
USE MORE POWERFUL SONAR
EQUIPMENT ACROSS A MUCH WIDER
SWATH OF THE INDIAN OCEAN.
>> Woodruff: THE PRESIDENT OF
NIGERIA, GOODLUCK JONATHAN,
VOWED TODAY HIS GOVERNMENT WILL
WAGE TOTAL WAR ON BOKO HARAM.
THE ISLAMIST GROUP KIDNAPPED
MORE THAN 200 SCHOOL GIRLS LAST
MONTH AND HAS CARRIED OUT A
SERIES OF OTHER ATTACKS.
JONATHAN PLEDGED AGAIN TO GET
THE GIRLS BACK, AND HE INSISTED
THE THREAT FROM BOKO HARAM WILL
BE ELIMINATED.
>> Woodruff: HOURS LATER CAME
WORD THAT THE MILITANTS HAD
KILLED AT LEAST 32 MORE PEOPLE
IN A VILLAGE IN NORTHEASTERN
NIGERIA.
>> Ifill: NEWS OF A SHOCKING
CRIME SWEPT ACROSS INDIA TODAY,
TWO TEEN-AGE SISTERS WERE GANG-
RAPED, STRANGLED AND LEFT
HANGING FROM A TREE EARLY
YESTERDAY.
IT HAPPENED NEAR A VILLAGE IN
UTTAR PRADESH STATE.
POLICE HAVE NOW ARRESTED FOUR
MEN INCLUDING TWO POLICE
OFFICERS.
INDIA DREW WORLD SCRUTINY LAST
YEAR AFTER A FATAL GANG-RAPE IN
NEW DELHI.
>> Woodruff: IN EGYPT'S
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION, WITH
NEARLY ALL THE VOTES COUNTED,
THE FORMER ARMY CHIEF, ABDEL
FATTAH AL-SISI, HAS WON A
LANDSLIDE VICTORY.
HIS CAMPAIGN ANNOUNCED TODAY HE
GARNERED MORE THAN 93% OF THE
BALLOTS CAST.
BUT ONLY 46& OF THOSE ELIGIBLE,
TURNED OUT EVEN AFTER VOTING WAS
EXTENDED FOR A THIRD DAY.
>> Ifill: BACK IN THIS COUNTRY,
THE SECRETARY OF HOMELAND
SECURITY, JEH JOHNSON, CAME
UNDER FIRE OVER IMMIGRATION
POLICY.
AT A HOUSE HEARING, REPUBLICANS
DEMANDED TO KNOW WHY THE
DEPARTMENT RELEASED 36,000
CONVICTED CRIMINALS LAST YEAR
WHO WERE IN LINE TO BE DEPORTED.
JOHNSON TOOK OFFICE IN DECEMBER.
>> I LOOK AT THE SAME LIST
YOU'VE SEEN AND I HAVE SEEN
SOME PRETTY SERIOUS CRIMINAL
CONVICTIONS ON THOSE-- ON
THAT LIST INCLUDING HOMICIDE
AND OTHER THINGS AND SO I
WANT A DEEPER UNDERSTANDING
OF THIS ISSUE MYSELF TO MAKE
SURE THAT WE'RE DOING
EVERYTHING WE SHOULD BE
DOING TO INSURANCE PUBLIC
SAFETY IN THIS PROCESS.
>> Ifill: REPUBLICANS AT THE
HEARING ALSO CRITICIZED
PRESIDENT OBAMA'S DECISION TO
DELAY A REVIEW OF DEPORTATIONS
UNTIL LATE SUMMER.
THEY CHARGED IT'S JUST A PLOY TO
PRESSURE THEM ON IMMIGRATION
REFORM.
>> Woodruff: THE UNITED STATES
HAS RECORDED MORE CASES OF
MEASLES SO FAR THIS YEAR THAN
ANY YEAR SINCE 1996.
THERE HAVE BEEN 307 CASES,
MOSTLY LINKED TO PEOPLE WHO
CAUGHT THE VIRUS ABROAD AND
SPREAD IT IN THE U.S. AMONG
PEOPLE WHO WERE NEVER
VACCINATED.
MOST OF THOSE CAME THIS MONTH IN
AN OUTBREAK AMONG AMISH
COMMUNITIES IN OHIO.
>> Ifill: COACHES, PARENTS AND
OFFICIALS FROM SPORTS LEAGUES
HELD A SUMMIT ON CONCUSSIONS AND
KIDS AT THE WHITE HOUSE TODAY.
THEY HEARD PRESIDENT OBAMA CALL
FOR MORE INTENSIVE RESEARCH ON
THE LONG-TERM EFFECTS OF HEAD
INJURIES IN THE YOUNG.
THE PRESIDENT ALSO URGED BROADER
RECOGNITION OF HOW SERIOUS THE
PROBLEM CAN BE.
HE TOLD THE AUDIENCE: "WE HAVE
TO CHANGE A CULTURE THAT SAYS,
'SUCK IT UP.'"
>> Woodruff: FORD HAS RECALLED
NEARLY 1.4 MILLION VEHICLES,
MOSTLY FOR POSSIBLE POWER
STEERING DEFECTS.
THEY INCLUDE, FORD ESCAPES AND
EXPLORERS, AND MERCURY MARINERS
FROM MODEL YEARS 2008 THROUGH
2011.
ABOUT 200,000 TAURUS SEDANS FROM
2010 TO 2014 ARE ALSO AFFECTED.
THEY MAY HAVE CORROSION
PROBLEMS.
>> Ifill: THE DOW JONES
INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE GAINED 65
POINTS TO CLOSE AT 16,698; THE
NASDAQ ROSE NEARLY 23 POINTS TO
CLOSE AT 4,248; THE S&P 500
ADDED 10, TO FINISH AT 1,920.
STILL TO COME ON THE NEWSHOUR.
MY WIDE-RANGING CONVERSATION
WITH SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN
KERRY.
GROWING CALLS FOR V.A. SECRETARY
ERIC SHINSEKI TO STEP DOWN.
A SWEEPING PUBLIC HEALTH
TRANSFORMATION IN RWANDA.
PLUS, THE POLITICAL FIGHT OVER
SCHOOL LUNCHES.
>> Woodruff: THE STORM KEPT
BUILDING TODAY OVER ALLEGATIONS
OF DELAYED CARE AND MISCONDUCT
AT VETERANS AFFAIRS HOSPITALS.
AND DEMANDS THAT V.A. SECRETARY
ERIC SHINSEKI RESIGN OR BE FIRED
GREW EVER MORE INTENSE.
HARI SREENIVASAN HAS THAT STORY.
>> THIS IS INTOLERABLE.
THE FINDINGS OF THIS REPORT ARE
TROUBLING AND GRAVE, OF COURSE,
THEY ARE UNACCEPTABLE,
UNCONSCIONABLE AND UNWORTHY OF
THE SERVICE OF OUR MEN AND WOMEN
IN UNIFORM.
>> Reporter: THE REACTION OF
HOUSE MINORITY LEADER NANCY
PELOSI SPOKE FOR POLITICIANS
FROM BOTH PARTIES TODAY, AFTER
AN INSPECTOR GENERAL'S INTERIM
REPORT ON THE V.A. MEDICAL
CENTER IN PHOENIX, ARIZONA.
IT ALLEGED V.A. STAFFERS THERE
COOKED THE BOOKS USING VARIOUS
PLOYS TO MAKE WAIT TIMES APPEAR
CLOSER TO THE GOAL OF JUST 14
DAYS.
IN FACT, THE I.G.'S FINDINGS
REVEALED PHOENIX-AREA VETERANS
SEEKING CARE HAD TO WAIT AN
AVERAGE OF 115 DAYS FOR A FIRST
APPOINTMENT.
AND 1,700 VETERANS WERE KEPT OFF
ANY OFFICIAL WAITING LIST AND
WERE AT RISK OF BEING LOST OR
FORGOTTEN.
THE REPORT DID NOT CONCLUDE
WHETHER LONG WAIT TIMES HAVE
CONTRIBUTED TO ANY PATIENT
DEATHS BECAUSE THAT PART OF THE
INVESTIGATION IS STILL ONGOING.
BUT THE FINDINGS STRUCK SPARKS
AT A HOUSE HEARING LAST NIGHT
WITH TOP DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS.
TENNESSEE REPUBLICAN PHIL ROE
CHARGED V.A. EXECUTIVES IN
PHOENIX GAMED THE SYSTEM TO EARN
BONUSES FOR KEEPING WAIT TIMES
SHORT.
>> WHAT I DON'T UNDERSTAND IS,
AS A VETERAN, AS A DOCTOR, AS A
PRACTITIONER, HOW YOU CAN STAND
IN A MIRROR AND LOOK AT YOURSELF
IN THE MIRROR AND SHAVE IN THE
MORNING AND THEN NOT THROW UP
KNOWING THAT YOU'VE GOT PEOPLE
OUT THERE AND THEY CAN'T GET IN,
AND THEY'RE DESPERATE TO GET IN.
SOMEONE WHO'S MAKING $180,000 A
YEAR GETS A BONUS FOR NOT TAKING
CARE OF THE VETERANS.
I DON'T GET THAT.
>> Reporter: AND MORE LAWMAKERS
FROM BOTH SIDES, INCLUDING
REPUBLICAN SENATOR JOHN MCCAIN
OF ARIZONA, CALLED FOR A
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION, AND FOR
CHANGE AT THE TOP OF THE V.A.
>> IT'S TIME FOR SECRETARY
SHINSEKI TO STEP DOWN.
AND IF SECRETARY SHINSEKI DOES
NOT STEP DOWN VOLUNTARILY, THEN
I CALL ON THE PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES TO RELIEVE HIM OF
HIS DUTIES, TO FIRE HIM.
>> Reporter: OTHERS, INCLUDING
HOUSE SPEAKER JOHN BOEHNER AND
MINORITY LEADER PELOSI STOPPED
SHORT TODAY OF GOING THAT FAR.
THEY SPOKE AT SEPARATE EVENTS.
>> THE QUESTION I ASK MYSELF IS,
IS HIM RESIGNING GOING TO GET US
TO THE BOTTOM OF THE PROBLEM?
IS IT GOING TO HELP US FIND OUT
WHAT'S REALLY GOING ON?
AND THE ANSWER I KEEP GETTING IS
NO.
BUT THE REAL ISSUE HERE IS THAT
THE PRESIDENT IS THE ONE WHO
SHOULD BE HELD ACCOUNTABLE.
>> I REALLY DO THINK WE HAVE TO
BE CAREFUL ABOUT THINKING THAT
JUST BECAUSE YOU REMOVE THE TOP
PERSON MEANS THAT YOU'VE CHANGED
THE SYSTEMIC PROBLEM THAT EXISTS
IN THE ORGANIZATION TEN YEARS
BEFORE SHINSEKI, OR FIVE YEARS
AT LEAST BEFORE SHINSEKI BECAME
THE SECRETARY.
>> Reporter: FOR HIS PART,
SHINSEKI ANSWERED BY INSISTING
HE'S ALREADY ORDERED CHANGES.
IN A "USA TODAY" OP-ED COLUMN,
HE WROTE:
"I REMAIN COMMITTED TO PROVIDING
THE HIGH-QUALITY CARE AND
BENEFITS THAT VETERANS HAVE
EARNED AND DESERVE.
AND WE WILL."
>> Reporter: PUBLICLY, AT LEAST,
THE SECRETARY STILL HAD SUPPORT
AT THE WHITE HOUSE.
SPOKESMAN JAY CARNEY:
>> WHEN IT COMES TO THE CURRENT
SITUATION, THE INQUIRIES AND THE
INVESTIGATIONS AND SOME OF THE
ALLEGATIONS, THE PRESIDENT WANTS
TO SEE THE RESULTS OF THESE
REPORTS.
AND HE, AS YOU KNOW, MADE CLEAR
THAT HE BELIEVES THERE OUGHT TO
BE ACCOUNTABILITY ONCE WE
ESTABLISH ALL THE FACTS.
>> Reporter: IN THE MEANTIME,
THE INSPECTOR GENERAL'S
INVESTIGATION HAS NOW EXPANDED
TO 42 V.A. HEALTH CENTERS
NATIONWIDE
FOR MORE ON THE GROWING OUTRAGE
OVER VETERAN HEALTH CARE AND
WHAT THE INSPECTOR GENERAL AT
THE V.A. FOUND, WE TURN TO "USA
TODAY" REPORTER GREGG ZOROYA.
>> GREG, LATE THIS AFTERNOON
THERE WAS A CLOSED DOOR
MEETING WITH ERIC SHINSEKI
AND SEVERAL VETERAN'S GROUPS
WHAT DO YOU KNOW OF WHAT
TOOK PLACE AT THAT MEETING?
>>.
>> WELL, I THINK THE KEY
HERE WAS TO TRY TO TELL THEM
HOW AGGRESSIVE THEY'RE
TRYING TO BE TO GET THESE
VETERANS IN TO SEE DOCTORS
MORE QUICKLY.
THEY OUTLINED A PLAN TO DO
JUST THAT.
>> SO WHAT ARE SOME OF THE
STEPS.
>> THE KEY THING THEY WANT
TO DO THEY SAY IS TO TRY TO
REACH OUT AND THEY'VE ASKED
ALL THEIR FACILITIES,
IDENTIFY THOSE PEOPLE WHO
HAVE BEEN WAITING TO SEE
DOCTORS LONGER THAN THEY
SHOULD.
AND THEN THEY'RE GOING TO
FIND WORK VERY HARD.
APPARENTLY CALL THEM
REPEATEDLY TO SEE IF THEY
CAN REACH THESE VETERANS AND
THEN GET THEM IN EITHER TO
SEE A DOCTOR AT THE HOSPITAL
IF THEY HAVE THE ABILITY TO
DO THAT.
OR GET THEM OUT TO A NONVA
DOCTOR AND GET THEM SOME
CARE.
>> AND SO THERE IS STILL
SOME DIVISION AMONG VETERANS
GROUPS, SOME WHO ARE CALLING
FOR SHINSEKI TO RESIGN AND
OTHERS WHO ARE SAYING
BASICALLY WHAT JOHN BOEHNER
SAID, THAT DOES THIS GET TO
THE BOTTOM OF IT.
>> RIGHT.
I THINK THOUGH THAT IN
GENERAL ALL THE GROUPS ARE
EXTREMELY CONCERNEDMENT
THOSE WHO HAVE CALLED FOR
HIM TO STEP DOWN.
BUT THERE'S OTHERS WHO WHILE
THEY ARE REERVING JUDGEMENT
ARE INCREASINGLY WORRIED
ABOUT WHETHER SHINSEKI CAN
SOLVE THIS PROBLEM.
>> THE OTHER QUESTION I HAD,
LET'S JUST KIND OF WALK OUR
AUDIENCE THROUGH WHAT THE
INSPECTOR GENERAL FOUND.
IT BASICALLY SAID THERE WERE
ALMOST TWO SETS OF LISTS.
THERE WERE SOME PEOPLE THAT
WERE NEVER PUT ON THE
WAITING LISTS JUST TO MAKE
THE NUMBERS LOOK BETTER?
>> RIGHT.
YOU HAVE PROBABLY AT THE
PHOENIX FACILITY YOU HAVE
SOMETHING LIKE 3,000
VETERANS WHO WERE WAITING
FOR APPOINTMENTS BUT THE
PROBLEM WAS IT WASN'T JUST
THAT.
IT WAS THAT WITHIN THAT
GROUP THERE WERE VETERANS
WHO WEREN'T EVEN ON ANY KIND
OF A LIST, OR WERE ON LISTS
THAT WERE UNOFFICIAL.
AND THEY WERE BEING HELD OFF
OF BEING CALCULATED IN THE
OFFICIAL SYSTEM, THE
INVESTIGATORS BELIEVE,
BECAUSE IT MADE THE RESULTS
OF THEIR PERFORMANCE AT THE
HOSPITAL LOOK BETTER.
THE LATER THEY COULD HOLD
OFF ON POUTING THESE PEOPLE
ON THE OBSERVATION LIST,
PERHAPS THE SHORTER THE WAIT
TIME REFLECTED IN THE
OFFICIAL RECORD WOULD BE.
>> SO THE REPORT SAYS THAT,
IT CALLS THESE SCHEDULING
SCHEME, REALLY, FOUR
DIFFERENT WAYS THAT THEY
WERE COOK THE BOOKS.
GIVE US SOME EXAMPLES.
>> PROBABLY THE MOST COMMON
ONE IS SIMPLY THE WAY THE
SYSTEM IS SUPPOSED TO WORK
IS IF A VETERAN NEEDED TO
SEE A DOCTOR, THEY ASKED A
VETERAN WHEN DOW WANT TO SEE
HIM.
AND THAT'S SUPPOSED TO BE
WHEN THEY SCHEDULE THE
APPOINTMENT.
THEY WOULD IN SOME CASES
KIND OF GUIDE THE VETERAN
THROUGH.
THEY WOULD ASK THEM, TELL
THEM WELL WE CAN'T SEE YOU
UNTIL A PARTICULAR DATE.
AND THEN TRY TO SEE IF THE
VETERANS WOULD AGREE TO AND
A HALF.
AND THAT WOULD BE THE
SO-CALLED STARTING DATE.
THAT WAS ONE AWAY OF GAMING
THE SYSTEM.
THERE WERE OTHER MUCH MORE
DRAMATIC WAYS.
IN SOME CASES THEY WOULD
ACTUALLY TELL STAFFERS TO GO
IN AND FIX SOME OF THE
APPOINTMENT,, CHANGE THEM SO
THAT THEY WOULD SHOW A
SHORTER WAIT TIME.
AND THEREBY IMPROVE SOME OF
THE OVERALL PERFORMANCE
RECORDS THAT WERE BEING SENT
TO HEADQUARTERS IN TERMS OF
HOW LONG IT WAS TAKING TO
SEE THESE PEOPLE.
>> SO THIS REPORT STILL
DOESN'T GET TO THAT
CONCLUSION ON WHETHER OR NOT
SOME OF THE PEOPLE THAT WERE
ON THESE WAIT LISTS OR
HAVEN'T EVER GOT TO SEAT
CARE THAT THEY DESERVE
ACTUALLY DIED AS A RESULT.
>> WELL, THEY KNOW, I THINK,
THAT THEY HAVE INDICATED
THAT SOME PEOPLE DID DIE
WHILE THEY WERE WAITING.
THE QUESTION IS WHETHER
THEY-- WHETHER THEIR LIVES
WERE LOST AS A RESULT OF NOT,
OF THE TREATMENT THEY DIDN'T
GET.
AND WHETHER OTHERS WHO
DIDN'T GET THE APPOINTMENTS
OR THE DIAGNOSIS IN TIME HAD
THEIR HEALTH AFFECTED.
IT SEEM THESE ARE FINDING
THINGS IN THIS AREA TO
RESERVE JUDGEMENT UNTIL THEY
HAVE A BETTER LOOK AT SOME
DEATH CERTIFICATES, MEDICAL
RECORDS AND A MORE
DEFINITIVE IDEA OF THESE
PEOPLE'S HEALTH.
AND IN CASE OF THE DEATH,
WHAT LEAD TO THEIR DEATH.
>> SO WHAT HAPPENS NEXT.
IF THIS INVESTIGATION
EXPANDS TO 40 PLUS MORE VA
FACILITIES?
>> RIGHT, WELL, THEY WANT TO
GET THROUGH TO THE ISSUE OF
THE HEALTH AND WHETHER THE
HEALTH WAS DAMAGED BY THESE
DELAYS.
AND THEY ALSO HAVE, AS YOU
HAVE NOTED, INCREASING
NUMBER OF FACILITIES ARE
LOOKING AT.
THEY STARTED OUT WITH TEN
WHEN THE SECRETARY FIRST
TESTIFIED ABOUT THIS TWO
WEEKS AGO, EXPANDED TO 26
LAST WEEK.
AND THEY TALKED ABOUT 42 IN
THE REPORT THAT WAS RELEASED
THIS WEEK.
IT'S NOT CLEAR HOW FAR IT'S
GOING TO GO.
BUT ONE MAJOR CONCLUSION
THAT CAME OUT OF THE INTERIM
REPORT WAS THAT THE
INVESTIGATORS ARE CERTAIN
THIS IS A SYSTEMIC PROBLEM.
>> TO CIRCLE BACK TO
SOMETHING WE SPOKE BURLIER
IT SEEMS THAT THE PRESSURE
IS MOUNTING ON ERIC SHIN
SECRETARY TOY STEP DOWN BUT
THE PUBLIC AFFAIRS OFFICER
PUTS OUT E-MAILS SAYING CAN
FIX THOSE CHANGES.
WHAT ABOUT THOSE VETERAN
ORGANIZATION THOSE YOU MIGHT
HAVE TALKED TO OR OTHER
FOLKS YOU MIGHT HAVE TALKED
TO.
DO THEY FEEL LIKE HIS
CONTINUED STAY HERE ACTUALLY
COMPROMISES THE ABILITY TO
TURN THINGS AROUND?
>> THE PRIMARY THEME THAT
I'M HEARING FROM THESE FOLKS
IS THEY JUST AREN'T SURE
YET.
AND THEY'RE VERY CONCERNED.
THEY WANT TO GET TO THEIR
PEOPLE.
THEY WANT TO TALK ABOUT WHAT
THE VA IS TRYING TO DO NOW.
THE BRIEFING TODAY WAS AN
EXAMPLE OF THAT.
THEY ARE GOING TO TAKE WHAT
THEY WERE TOLD IN TERMS OF
THE STEPS THAT WERE TAKEN TO
GET THESE VETERANS CARE AS
QUICKLY AS POSSIBLE.
AND TAKE TO TO THEIR MEMBERS,
LEADERSHIP AND SEE HOW THIS
IS UNFOLDING AND WHETHER
THEY SHOULD TAKE MORE
DRAMATIC STEPS WITH.
WHETHER THEY SHOULD IN FACT
CALL FOR THEM TO STEP DOWN.
THE JURY IS STILL OUT FOR
MANY OF THESE MAJOR VETERANS
GROUPS.
>> ALL RIGHT, GREG, OF
"U.S.A. TODAY", THANKS SO
MUCH.
>> MY PLEASURE.
>> FROM THE WHITE HOUSE ROSE
GUARD TONE THE GRADUATION
DAY PODIUM AT WEST POINT
PRESIDENT OBAMA HAS BEGUN
MOUNTING A VIGOROUS DEFENSE
OF HIS FOREIGN POLICY
RECORD.
NOW THE NATION'S TOP
DIPLOMAT HAS ALSO JOINED THE
FRAY, I SAT DOWN WITH
SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN
KERRY TO TALK ABOUT THE
OBAMA ADMINISTRATION'S FOOT
PRINT AROUND THE WORLD AND
WHETHER IT CAN HANDLE THE
AFFAIRS OF ITS HIT
TALE-- MILITARY VETERANS
ONCE THEY GET HOME.
MR. SECRETARY, THANK YOU FOR
JOINING US.
>> HAPPY TO BE WITH YOU.
>> I WANT TO START A LITTLE
BIT OF THE NEWS OF THE DAY.
THERE HAS BEEN MOUNTING
CALLS FOR THE SECRETARY OF
VETERAN'S AFFAIRS TO STEP
ASIDE INCLUDING FROM
DEMOCRATS.
AS A VETERAN YOURSELF, IS
THIS SOMETHING YOU THINK YOU
SHOULD BE CONSIDERING AT
THIS POINT?
>> I THINK IT'S FAIR TO SAY
THAT EVERY VETERAN IS DEEPLY
CONCERNED ABOUT WHAT HAS
TAKEN PLACE.
I HAVE PERSONALLY FEEL A
HUGE REMINDER FROM THE
STRUGGLES WE HAD WHEN
VETERANS CAME BACK FROM
VIETNAM AND THERE WERE
DELAYS AND PROBLEMS.
>> PRESIDENT SAID HE IS
DOPELY TROUBLED.
ARE YOU?
>> OF COURSE.
I THINK ANYBODY IS CONCERNED
ABOUT THE FACT THAT THOSE
WHO HAVE SERVED, THE REASON
I RAISE THE VIETNAM THING IS
SIMPLY BECAUSE EVERYBODY
SAID NEVER AGAIN.
THERE WAS THIS HUGE, YOU
KNOW, EFFORT TO MAKE SURE
VETERANS CAME BACK AND WERE
APPROPRIATELY THANKED,
APPROPRIATELY WELCOMED HOME.
AND OBVIOUSLY APPROPRIATELY
CARED FOR.
AND I THINK EVERYBODY IS
TROUBLED BY THE FACT THAT
SOMETHING HAS GONE AWRY.
>> I WOULD LIKE TO TRACH YOU
ON A TOUR AROUND THE WORLD
WITH YOU, IF YOU WOULD.
BEGINNING ON THE COULDN'T
NEGOTIATE OF AFRICA.
THE PRESIDENT OF NIGERIA
GOODLUCK JONATHAN SAID TODAY
HE IS GOING TO UNDERTAKE A
FULL SCALE ASSAULT ON BOKO
HARAM IN THE EFFORT TO FREE
THE NIGERIAN GIRLS.
AS YOU WATCH SOMETHING LIKE
THIS UNFOLD, SOMETHING SO
HARD TO PENETRATE, DO YOU
WORRY THAT THE CENTRAL
AFRICAN REPUBLIC AND SUDAN
OR IN NIGERIA THAT THERE ARE
LIMITS TO WHAT U.S.
INTERVENTION CAN DO.
>> WELL, GOODLUCK JONATHAN
IS TALKING ABOUT ENGAGING IN
SELF-HELP, DOING WHAT HE
THINKS HE NEEDS TO DO, TO
PROTECT THE RIGHTS OF HIS
PEOPLE AND THE SOVEREIGNTY
OF HIS COUNTRY.
>> IS THERE A ROLE FOR NEWS
THERE.
>> WELL, THERE IS A ROLE.
AND WE'RE PLAYING A ROLE.
WE HAVE PEOPLE ON THE GROUND
THAT WE HAVE PUT ON THE
GROUND IN ORDER TO ASSIST
THEM.
SEVERAL DIFFERENT
DISCIPLINES, PEOPLE IN THE
INTELLIGENCE COMMUNITY,
PEOPLE IN THE JUSTICE
COMMUNITY, PEOPLE IN THE
MILITARY COMMUNITY, ALL OF
WHOM HAVE DIFFERENT
EXPERTISE TO BRING TO THE
TABLE.
I THINK AN ALL-OUT ASSAULT,
I'M NOT SURE WHAT THAT
MEANS.
I WOULD WANT TO KNOW WHAT
THAT MEANS.
IT COULD BE VERY RISKY TO
THE YOUNG WOMEN.
AND THERE MAY BE A TIME AND
PLACE FOR THAT.
BUT I THINK WE HAVE TO LOOK
AT THIS VERY, VERY CLOSELY.
I ACTUALLY HOPE TO BE
TALKING TO PRESIDENT GOODLUCK
JONATHAN SOMEWHERE IN THE
COURSE OF TODAY OR TOMORROW.
AND WE ARE, AS I SAY,
PREPARED TO BE AS HELPFUL AS
WE POSSIBLY REQUEST.
BUT THIS IS --
>> IS HE IS REQUESTING FOR
YOUR HELP.
BUT THIS IS A CHALLENGE FOR
EVERYONE EVERYWHERE.
HE HAS NOT TO MY KNOWLEDGE
SAID WE WANT YOUR HELP IN A
MILITARY SENSE WITH RESPECT
TO THESE YOUNG WOMEN BUT WE
WILL OBVIOUSLY HAVE
DISCUSSIONS WITH HIM ABOUT
WHAT THE RIGHT WAY TO
PROCEED IS.
>> FORESTORY UNFOLDING AS WE
SPEAK IS EDWARD SNOWDEN.
YOU SAID YESTERDAY IN AN
INTERVIEW THAT HE SHOULD MAN
UP AND COME BACK AND FACE
THE CONSEQUENCES.
HE HAS SUGGESTED HE WOULD
LIKE TO COME HOME AS WELL
ARE.
THERE CONVERSATIONS ON ANY
LEVEL TAKING PLACE ABOUT
THAT HAPPENING?
>> I'M NOT GOING TO GET INTO
THE LEGAL PROCESS ON THIS.
THAT'S UP TO THE DEPARTMENT
OF JUSTICE, UP TO THE WHITE
HOUSE SPECIFICALLY.
HE SHOULD PROVE HIS RESPECT
FOR THAT SYSTEM.
HE SHOULD DO WHAT MANY
PEOPLE WHO HAVE TAKEN ISSUE
WITH THEIR OWN GOVERNMENT DO,
WHICH IS CHALLENGE IT, SPEAK
OUT, ENGAGE IN AN ACT OF
CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE.
BUT OBVIOUSLY ACCEPT THE
CONSEQUENCES OF THAT ACT OF
CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE.
NOT FIND REFUGE IN
AUTHORITARIAN RUSSIA OR SEEK
ASYLUM IN CUBA OR SOMEWHERE
ELSE.
THAT'S RUNNING AWAY FROM THE
CONSEQUENCES.
>> MR. SECRETARY, THE
PRESIDENT SAID IN AN
INTERVIEW THIS MORNING WITH
NPR THAT THERE ARE A LOT OF
BASEBALL AND SPORTS
METAPHORS ABOUT BLOCKING AND
TACKLING FOREIGN POLICY.
DOES THE PRESIDENT GET A BAD
RAP IN YOUR OPINION FOR
BEING BREAK OR NOT TAKING
THE LONG HOME RUNS INSTEAD
OF THE BASE HITS?
>> I DON'T THINK THE
PRESIDENT FRANKLY TAKES
ENOUGH CREDIT FOR THE
SUCCESSES THAT ARE ON THE
TABLE RIGHT NOW.
I MEAN IF YOU LOOK AT WHAT
HAS HAPPENED IN UKRAINE, THE
PRESIDENT LEAD AN EFFORT TO
TRY TO KEEP EUROPE UNIFIED
WITH THE UNITED STATES, TO
PUT DIFFICULT SANCTIONS ON
THE TABLE.
EUROPE WASN'T THRILLED WITH
THAT.
BUT THEY CAME ALONG.
THAT WAS LEADERSHIP.
AND THE PRESIDENT SUCCEEDED
IN HAVING AN IMPACT
ULTIMATELY, TOGETHER WITH
THE EUROPEANS ON THE CHOICES
THAT FACE PRESIDENT PUTIN.
IN SYRIA, THE PRESIDENT
OBVIOUSLY MADE HIS DECISION
TO STRIKE SYRIA.
AND APPROPRIATELY SENT THAT
DECISION TO CONGRESS.
CONGRESS DIDN'T WANT TO
MOVE.
BUT WE CAME UP WITH ANOTHER
SOLUTION WHICH WAS GET ALL
OF THOSE CHEMICAL WEAPONS
OUT RATHER THAN JUST HAVE
ONE OR TWO DAYS OF STRIKE.
THE PRESIDENT HAS NOW
SUCCEEDED IN GETTING 92% OF
THOSE WEAPONS OUT OF SYRIA.
THERE IS ONE LAST TRANSFER
THAT HAS TO TAKE PLACE TO
GET TO 100%.
I BELIEVE IT WILL TAKE
PLACE.
IN ADDITION, THE PRESIDENT
HAS ENGAGED WITH IRAN.
WE'RE ON A COURSE TO
ABSOLUTE COLLISION WHERE
THEY WERE BUILDING THE
NUCLEAR SYSTEM AND THE WORLD
WAS STANDING OPPOSED TO
THAT.
BUT THE PRESIDENT PUT IN
PLACE A SERIES OF SANCTIONS,
A CAPACITY TO BE ABLE TO
BRING IRAN TO THE TABLE.
WE ARE NOW IN THE MIDDLE OF
NEGOTIATIONS.
EVERY ONE WILL AGREE THE
SANCTIONS REGIME HAS HELD
TOGETHER.
THE WEAPONS-- THE NUCLEAR
PROGRAM HAS BEEN FROZEN AND
ROLLED BACKWARDS.
AND WE NOW HAVE EXPANDED THE
AMOUNT OF TIME THAT IRAN
MIGHT HAVE FOR A BREAKOUT.
THAT'S A SUCCESS.
SO I THINK WE ARE AS ENGAGED,
MORE ENGAGED THAN AT ANY
TIME IN AMERICAN HISTORY.
AND I THINK THAT CASE IS
THERE TOO SHALL FULLY PROVEN
AND LAID OUT.
>> YET THAT'S NOT THE
GENERALLY HELD IMPRESSION.
>> NO, IT'S NOT.
AND THE REASON IS THERE IS A
GENERAL, FRANKLY, NOT FULLY
INFORMED, NOT FACTUAL,
CONVENTIONAL SORT OF PROCESS
THAT GETS PLAYED OUT IN THE
MEDIA.
AND OF COURSE THERE IS AN
INDUSTRY IN WASHINGTON TODAY
OF OPPOSITIONISM.
OPPOSITIONISTS, OPPOSE
ANYTHING.
AND THE CONGRESS AND ITS
CURRENT PACE OF LEGISLATING
TELLS THE WHOLE STORY.
>> DO YOU WANT TO TALK ABOUT
AFGHANISTAN.
BUS THE PRESIDENT OF COURSE
PUT FORWARD HIS PLAN THIS
WEEK TO PRETTY DRAMATIC
DRAWDOWN OF FORCES TO UNDER
10,000, HALF THAT, AGAIN, IN
THE NEXT YEAR.
AND EVEN THOUGH THERE HAS
BEEN SOME APPLAUD FOR THE
IDEA THAT WE ARE WINDING
DOWN IN AFGHANISTAN, THERE
HAS ALSO BEEN CRITICISM THAT
IT IS HAPPENING TOO QUICKLY,
THAT THE TIMETABLE IS TOO
FAST WATCH.
DOW SAY TO THAT?
>> 13 YEARS IN A WAR IS NOT
QUICKLY.
IN 2009 PRESIDENT OBAMA PUT
IN PLACE THE FIRST TRULY
ORGANIZED FOCUSED STRATEGIC
APPROACH TO AFGHANISTAN.
AFGHANISTAN HAD BEEN
CANNIBALIZED BEFORE THAT,
FOR BOTH TROOPS AND TALENT
AND MONEY THAT HAD GONE TO
IRAQ.
AND WHEN THE PRESIDENT CAME
IN HE FOUND IN 2009 THAT
AFGHANISTAN WAS A DRIFT AND
IN DANGER.
SO THE PRESIDENT INCREASED
THE NUMBERS OF TROOPS, THE
NOW WELL-KNOWN SURGE AND WE
HAD UP TO 160, 180,000
TROOPS IN AFGHANISTAN AT ONE
POINT.
AND ALWAYS WITH A VIEW TO
TRYING TO TRAIN, EQUIP, AND
PREPARE THE AFGHANS TO TAKE
CHARGE OF THEIR OWN COUNTRY.
THE PRESIDENT SET A
TIMETABLE.
HE SAID IN 2009 WE WILL
TRANSFER SECURITY
RESPONSIBILITY TO THE
AFGHANS BY SUCH AND SUCH A
DATE.
THAT WAS LAST YEAR.
AND THIS YEAR.
WE'VE DONE IT.
THEY HAD A VERY SUCCESSFUL
ELECTION.
AND THEY PROVIDED THE
SECURITY AND THEY DID THE
PLANNING, AND THEY DID THE
EXECUTION.
THAT IS EXACTLY WHAT THE
PRESIDENT IS NOW TRYING TO
DO WITH RESPECT TO THE FINAL
STEPS.
>> YOU WON'T BE SURPRISED TO
HEAR THAT DIC CHENEY, THE
FORMER VICE PRESIDENT CALLED
THE TIMETABLE STUPID AND
UNWISE, AND THAT IT WOULD
REINFORCE THE NATION THAT WE
ARE WEAK.
>> WELL, LOOK, I'M NOT
SURPRISED TO HEAR FROM DIC
CHENEY THAT SOMETHING THAT'S
OBVIOUSLY NUMBER ONE
NEGATIVE, AND NUMBER TWO
WRONG.
DIC CHENEY WAS COMPLETEDLY
WRONG ABOUT IRAQ.
AND WE ARE STILL STRUGGLING
WITH THEAFTER MATH OF WHAT
DIC CHENEY AND HIS CREW
THOUGHT WAS THE RIGHT POLICY
TO GO IN AND START A WAR OF
CHOICE FOR THE WRONG
REASONS.
AND THEY TURNED TOPSY-TURVY
THE ENTIRE REGION WITH
RESPECT TO SUNNI AND SHI'A
AND THE RELATIONSHIPS THERE.
SO THE FACT IS THAT THEY
HAVE BEEN-- DEEPLY, DEEPLY
WRONG IN THE POLICY THAT
THEY PURSUED, AND ANY ADVICE
FROM HIM REALLY HAS NO
MEANING TO ME WITH RESPECT
TO WHAT WE'RE DOING TODAY.
>> LET ME ASK YOU ABOUT
SYRIA.
NEXT WEEK WE'RE GOING TO
WATCH KBARBAR AL-ASSAD STAND
FOR A THIRD TERM AND YOU AND
OTHERS-- 7th TERM, AND YOU
ARE OTHERS SAID HE SHOULD
STEP DOWN, CLEARLY ISN'T
GOING ANYWHERE, AND EVEN
THOUGH YOU GOT THE CHEMICAL
WEAPONS OUT, DO YOU WONDER
IF THIS WAS A TRADE-OFF THAT
WAS WORTH IT?
>> NO, I THINK THAT'S NOT
THE TRADE-OFF, GWEN.
WE'RE NOT TRADING OFF
CHEMICAL WEAPONS FOR ASSAD
STAYING.
WE'RE GETTING THE CHEMICAL
WEAPONS OUT, BUT THE EFFORTS
TO SUPPORTED VETTED,
MODERATE OPPOSITION
CONTINUED AND IN FACT ARE
BEING STEPPED UP.
I JUST DON'T SEE ANYWAY
POSSIBLE FOR BASHAR AL-ASSAD
TO EVER GOVERN WHATEVER YOU
WANT TO CALL SYRIA IN THE
FUTURE, WHATEVER CONSTITUTES
SYRIA, TO GOFF ATTORNEY WITH
ANY LEGITIMACY WHATEVER SO
EVER.
>> HE DOES BY GETTING
REELECTED.
>> NO, THIS IS A COMPLETELY
PHONEY, FRAUDULENT EFFORT BY
ASSAD TO CLAIM LEGITIMACY
FOR AN ELECTION THAT NOBODY
IN THE INTERNATIONAL
COMMUNITY WITH SIGNIFICANCE
IS GOING TO RESPECT.
THE UNITED NATIONS IS TO THE
GOING TO RESPECT IT.
THE GLOBAL COMMUNITY THAT IS
SUPPORTING THE OPPOSITION IS
TO THE GOING SUPPORT.
SO ITS-- IT DOESN'T TAKE YOU
ANYWHERE.
>> UKRAINE.
>> MARGARET WARN CERTIFICATE
JUST COMING BACK FROM
EASTERN UKRAINE WHERE SHE
WATCHED THE ELECTIONS UNFOLD
AND UNLIKE OTHER PLACES,
THERE WAEPTED-- EGYPT, FOR
INSTANCE THERE WAS GREAT
TURNOUT.
BUT CRIMEA IS STILL GONE.
RUSSIAN TROOPS MAY OR MAY
NOT BE PULLING BACK FROM THE
BORDER.
YOU HAVE SAID THIS WAS A
CALCULATED, CALIBRATED
STRATEGY, IS IT TURNING OUT
THE WAY YOU INTENDED?
>> WELL, AT THE MOMENT, THE
STRATEGY IS PUTTING IN PLACE
A NEW PRESIDENT, ELECTED BY
THE VAST MAJORITY OF THE
PEOPLE OF UKRAINE.
IT WAS A VERY LARGE,
SIGNIFICANT TURNOUT WITH A
HUGE VOTE, THAT WON ON THE
FIRST ROUND WITH A
SUPERMAJORITY FOR A NEWLY
ELECTED PRESIDENT.
I THINK THAT'S VERY
SIGNIFICANT.
>> THE TROOPS THAT WERE ON
THE BORDER ARE MOVING BACK
TOWARDS MOSCOW, NOT TOWARDS
KIEV.
AND THE FACT IS THAT I THINK
EVERYBODY ACKNOWLEDGES THAT
THE SANCTIONS THAT THE
PRESIDENT PUT IN PLACE, HAVE
HAD A PROFOUND IMPACT ON
ROUSHA, AND THERE WERE
GREATER COSTS YET TO COME
AND MIGHT YET COME IF RUSSIA
CAN'T FIND A WAY TO BECOME A
CONSTRUCTIONIVE PARTNER IN
TRYING TO HELP STRENGTHEN
UKRAINE GOING FORWARD.
SO YOU KNOW, THERE ARE STILL
DANGER SIGNS THERE THAT WE
HOPE WILL CHANGE.
THERE IS EVIDENCE OF RUSSIA
CROSSING OVER, TRAINED
PERSONNEL FROM CHECHNYA,
TRAINED IN RUSSIA TO COME
ACROSS TO STIR THINGS UP, TO
ENGAGE IN FIINGT.
WE HOPE THE RUSSIANS WOULD
ACTUALLY ENGAGE MORE
PROACTIVELY IN EFFORTS TO
NOW TRY TO DE-ESCALATE, TAKE
ADVANTAGE OF THE ELECTION,
BUILD A ROAD FORWARD.
WHERE UKRAINE BECOMES A
BRIDGE BETWEEN THE WEST AND
THE EAST.
>> FROM YOUR CONVERSATIONS
WITH YOUR COUNTERPARTS IN
UKRAINE AND IN RUSSIA, DO
YOU SEE ANY POSSIBILITY OF
MOVEMENT ON THAT FRONT?
>> WELL, WE'RE HOPEFUL.
I TALKED TO THE FOREIGN
MINISTER OF RUSSIA YESTERDAY.
THEY ARE HOPING THAT THERE
MIGHT BE A WAY, THEY EXPRESS
THEY HOPE, LET ME SAY, THAT
THERE MIGHT BE A WAY TO GO
FORWARD.
OBVIOUSLY WORDS ARE
NOT-- WHAT WILL MEAN
ANYTHING HERE, IT'S ACTION I
WANT TO INVITE ASKING YOU
ABOUT SOMETHING THAT YOU
EXPENDED A LOT OF YOUR
PERSONAL ENERGY ON THAT IN
THE MIDDLE EAST PEACE
NEGOTIATIONS.
WHICH BENJAMIN NETANYAHU HAS
SAID ARE DEAD, THE PROCESS
IS DEAD HAMAS IS CLEARLY
INVOLVED IN THE UNIFICATION
PLAN AND MOVING AHEAD THAT
IS SO OFFENDED ISRAEL AND
EVERYBODY WALKED AWAY FROM
THE TABLE.
ARE YOU PERSONALLY
DISAPPOINTED AT ALL THAT
THIS SEEMS TO BE GOING
NOWHERE FAST?
>> WELL OBVIOUSLY I'M
DISAPPOINTED AT THE PROCESS
THAT WHAT IS IN PLACE, THAT
THAT DIDN'T PRODUCE THE NEXT
STEP BUT I DON'T LEAVE THAT
IN THE MIDDLE EAST, YOU KNOW,
EITHER PARTY CAN AFFORD TO
SIMPLY MAINTAIN THE STATUS
QUO AND BELIEVE THAT THERE
IS A ROAD TO GREATER
STABILITY AND TO PEACE
WITHOUT REENGAGING AND WOULD
COMING BACK AT SOME POINT IN
TIME TO THE NEGOTIATING
PROCESS PRESIDENT ABBA
SAID THAT HE IS PREPARED TO
GO BACK TO THE TALKS BUT HE
HAS CERTAIN CONDITIONS THAT
HAVE TO BE MET PETROLEUM NET
NETANYAHU ARE WAITING TO SEE
WHAT HAPPENS WITH THE HAMAS
RECONCILIATION W THE
ANNOUNCEMENT OF A NEW
GOVERNMENT, WITH THE
QUESTION OF WHAT THAT NEW
GOVERNMENT MAY OR MAY NOT
CHOOSE TO DO.
THAT IS AN APPROPRIATE THING
TO BE DOING.
WE ARE ALL WAITING.
>> ARE YOU THE LAST LIVING
OPTIMIST ON THIS.
>> I'M NOT AN OPTIMIST, I'M
A REALIST.
AND MY REALITY CHECK TELLS
ME THAT NEITHER SIDE IS
GOING TO BE ABLE TO LIVE FOR
THE LONG HAUL WITH THE
STATUS QUO WITHOUT SYRIA'S
PROBLEMS EVOLVING.
SO EVENTUALLY THERE WILL
HAVE TO BE SOME DISCUSSION
ABOUT SOME MANAGEMENT OF
THAT PROCESS WHETHER IT'S A
FULL BLOWN PEACE PROCESS OR
WHETHER IT'S INDIVIDUAL
STEPS, OR NOT, I DON'T KNOW,
GWEN.
BUT I KNOW THIS, THAT ISRAEL'S
SECURITY WHICH IS PARAMOUNT
TO THE UNITED STATES AND FOR
ISRAELIES WILL BE BETTER
PROJECT-- PROTECTED BY
FINDING A ROAD AHEAD.
PALESTINIAN RIGHTS AND
ABILITY TO HAVE A STATE CAN
ONLY COME THROUGH SOME KIND
OF POLITICAL PROCESS.
AND BOTH OF THOSE
ASPIRATIONS ARE WHAT GOVERN
LIFE ULTIMATELY IN THAT
REGION.
AND THE HOPES OF THAT EDGE
ARE ON.
SO MY JOB WAS TO PUSH IT
FORWARD MI JOB IS TO TRY TO
FIND THE OPTIMISM AND
POSSIBILITIES, NOT TO GIVE
UP.
AND I REFUSE GIVE UP.
I THINK THAT YOU KNOW WE
HAVE TO FIND THE WAY AHEAD.
THIS HASN'T GONE AWAY.
AND 40, 50 YEARS.
AND IT'S NOT GOING TO
SUDDENLY JUST SORT OF SOLVE
ITSELF BY ITSELF.
THAT'S OUR JOB IS TO TRY TO
PUSH THE PROCESS FORWARD.
>> SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN
CERY, THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: NEXT, PART TWO OF
OUR LOOK AT RWANDA, TWENTY YEARS
AFTER THE GENOCIDE THAT LEFT
ALMOST ONE MILLION PEOPLE DEAD.
SINCE 1994, RWANDA HAS MADE
PROGRESS IN REDUCING EXTREME
POVERTY.
HEALTH CARE HAS GOTTEN SPECIAL
ATTENTION, WITH THE HELP OF A
BOSTON BASED ORGANIZATION.
SPECIAL CORESPONDENT FRED DE SAM
LAZARO HAS THE STORY, PART OF
HIS "AGENTS FOR CHANGE" SERIES.
>> Reporter: BOSCO NTAWUGIRUWE
IS A FARMER WHO BARELY SCRAPS
BY.
HE DIDN'T FINISH HIGH SCHOOL,
BUT HE IS ALSO A FOOT SOLDIER IN
A PUBLIC HEALTH ARMY THAT'S
DELIVERING RESULTS AS IMPRESSIVE
AS THE VIEW ON HIS WAY TO WORK
IN RWANDA'S REMOTE VOLCANIC
HIGHLANDS
>> HAVE YOU BEEN TAKING YOUR
MEDS?
>> Reporter: EACH DAY, HE CHECKS
TO MAKE SURE PATIENTS TAKE THEIR
MEDICINES FOR H.I.V., FOR
TUBERCULOSIS OR TO CHECK ON THE
RECOVERY OF A MALNOURISHED
CHILD.
>> SHE'S LOOKING GOOD.
>> Reporter: AVERAGE LIFE
EXPECTANCY HAS MORE THAN DOUBLED
IN THE PAST 20 YEARS IN RWANDA.
IT'S NOW 62.
99% OF RWANDANS HAVE ACCESS TO
SAFE DRINKING WATER.
THE TRANSFORMATION IS STRIKING
FOR THOSE WITH MEMORIES OF THE
MASSACRE OF NEARLY ONE MILLION
PEOPLE 20 YEARS AGO.
AFTER THE GENOCIDE, THIS SMALL
CROWDED COUNTRY, ONE OF THE
WORLD'S POOREST, WAS WRITTEN
OFF, INCLUDING IN ONE PROMINENT
MEDICAL JOURNAL, SAYS HEALTH
MINISTER DR AGNES BANIGWAHO
>> JUST AFTER THE GENOCIDE THERE
WAS AN ARTICLE PUBLISHED IN THE
LANCET SAYING RWANDA IS A LAND
OF DESOLATION, DON'T INVEST
THERE.
>> Reporter: RWANDA'S POST-
GENOCIDE GOVERNMENT HAD LITTLE
CREDIBILITY EARLY ON, DRAWN
MOSTLY FROM AN ARMY OF EXILED
REBELS.
IT'S LEADER, PAUL KAGAME
CONSOLIDATED POWER TO BECOME
PRESIDENT AND HAS BEEN CALLED
EVERYTHING FROM A BENEVOLENT TO
A RUTHLESS DICTATOR FOR CRACKING
DOWN ON FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION.
HE'S BEEN ACCUSED OF
INTERFERENCE AND PLUNDER IN HIS
MINERAL RICH BUT TROUBLED
NEIGHBOR, THE DEMOCRATIC
REPUBLIC OF CONGO, WHERE MANY OF
THE GENOCIDE ERA REGIME FLED
AFTER THEY WERE DEFEATED.
BUT THERE'S NO QUESTION RWANDA
HAS CHANGED SOMETHING THAT'S
ATTRACTED INITIALLY RETICENT AID
GROUPS.
ONE OF THEM IS BOSTON BASED
PARTNERS IN HEALTH.
DOCTOR PETER DROBAC HEADS ITS
RWANDA OFFICE.
>> ONE OF THE THINGS THAT I SEE
RWANDA HAVING DONE VERY
EFFECTIVELY IS REALLY TAKE
OWNERSHIP FOR ITS OWN
DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES.
WHAT HAPPENS ALL TOO OFTEN IN,
IN POOR COUNTRIES IS THAT THE
AGENDA IS DRIVEN BY THE DONORS,
OR BY THE DEVELOPMENT AGENCIES.
>> Reporter: DESPITE MEAGER
RESOURCES, HE SAYS, RWANDA HAS
BUILT A NEW HEALTH CARE SYSTEM.
RWANDA HAS A SEVERE SHORTAGE OF
DOCTORS.
THERE'S JUST ONE FOR EVERY
100,000 PEOPLE.
THE COMPARABLE FIGURE IN THE
U.S. IS 273.
SO THERE'S A CONCERTED EFFORT TO
TRAIN OTHER PROVIDERS: NURSES
AND ESPECIALLY COMMUNITY HEALTH
WORKERS, VOLUNTEERS WHO GO INTO
THEIR COMMUNITIES LOOKING FOR
THE EARLIEST SIGNS OF DISEASE
AND ILLNESS.
BOSCO NTAWUGIRUWE IS ONE OF
45,000 HEALTH WORKERS ELECTED BY
THEIR COMMUNITIES.
THEY RECEIVE SIX WEEKS OF
TRAINING IN BASIC PREVENTIVE
HEALTH AND PERIODIC REFRESHER
COURSES.
>> ( translated ): I ALWAYS
WANTED TO BE A TEACHER SO THIS
IS VERY FULFILLING.
I HAVE SKILLS NOW AND I AM
GIVING BACK TO THE COMMUNITY.
>> Reporter: WHEN ONE-YEAR-OLD
FRANCINE BEGAN SHOWING SIGNS OF
ILLNESS, HER MOTHER FIRST SOUGHT
OUT HER COMMUNITY HEALTH WORKER
FOR ADVICE.
>> ( translated ): IT WAS NOT
HARD TO FIND BOSCO.
HE ADVISED ME TO GROW A KITCHEN
GARDEN TO GROW MORE FRUITS AND
VEGETABLES.
>> Reporter: HE ALSO TOOK MOTHER
AND CHILD TO THE REGIONAL HEALTH
CENTER WHERE FRANCINE WAS
TREATED FOR MNUTRITION.
ONE OF MANY CONDITIONS THAT CAN
BE DIAGNOSED AND TREATED BEFORE
THEY ESCALATE, SAYS HEALTH
MINISTER BINAGWAHO.
>> THEY CAN TREAT 80% OF THE
BURDEN OF DISEASE AT COMMUNITY
LEVEL, ESPECIALLY FOR WOMAN AND
CHILDREN UNDER FIVE, MEANING
COUGH AND FEVER, THEY GIVE
ANTIBIOTIC.
MALARIA, THEY DO THE DIAGNOSTIC
AND THEY DO THE TREATMENT
>> Reporter: AS A RESULT, THE
NUMBER OF CHILDREN DYING BEFORE
AGE FIVE HAS DROPPED TO A
QUARTER OF WHAT IT WAS IN THE
YEAR 2000.
THE NUMBER MOTHERS WHO DIE IN
CHILDBIRTH IS DOWN 66% SINCE
1990.
IN PART BECAUSE 99% OF PREGNANT
WOMEN RECEIVE AT LEAST ONE
PRENATAL CARE VISIT.
>> WE SHOULD DEMYSTIFY CARE
PROVIDING, THE WAY WE PROVIDE
CARE.
>> Reporter: DEMYSTIFY CARE
BASICALLY?
>> YEAH.
YEAH, WE SHOULD EMPLOY THE
COMMUNITY TO BE IN CHARGE.
>> Reporter: PATIENTS WHO NEED
MORE ATTENTION GO TO REGIONAL
HEALTH CLINICS STAFFED BY NURSES
AND WHEN NEEDED, TO HOSPITAL.
THE FOCUS HAS BEEN ON THE
POOREST AND MOST ISOLATED
REGIONS, UNLIKE MOST COUNTRIES
WHOSE BEST FACILITIES ARE IN
CITIES.
RWANDA'S MOST MODERN HOSPITAL
WAS BUILT BUTARO, IN THE
MOUNTAINOUS NORTH, MOSTLY WITH
FUNDS FROM PARTNERS IN HEALTH.
EMMANUEL KAMANZI IS A MANAGER
WITH THE GROUP
>> WHILE WE WERE BUILDING,
PEOPLE COULDN'T BELIEVE THIS WAS
THEIR HOSPITAL.
THEY WERE, LIKE, THIS IS A
RESORT COMING UP FOR EXPERTS,
FOR MUZUNGUS, FOR WHITE PEOPLE,
FOR TOURISTS.
BUT WE WERE LIKE, THIS IS YOUR
HOSPITAL; THIS IS WHAT YOU
DESERVE.
>> Reporter: THE GOVERNMENT RUNS
THIS HOSPITAL WITH SOME
OPERATING MONEY AND EXPERTISE
PROVIDED FROM PARTNERS IN
HEALTH.
THE GOAL IS TO BUILD LOCAL
CAPACITY IN THE PUBLIC SECTOR.
A LESSON THE GROUP'S DR DROBAC
SAYS IT LEARNED IN HAITI, WHERE
IT BEGAN WORKING 27 YEARS AGO.
>> AFTER THE EARTHQUAKE, FOR
EXAMPLE, WHEN BILLIONS OF
DOLLARS WERE PLEDGED FOR
RECONSTRUCTION FOR HAITI, ALMOST
NONE OF THAT MONEY WENT INTO THE
PUBLIC SECTOR.
AND IT WAS BECAUSE OF
IMPRESSIONS THAT THE PUBLIC
SECTOR IS WEAK, IS CORRUPT, IS
DISORGANIZED, IS INEFFECTIVE,
BUT WHAT HAPPENS IS YOU REALLY
GET A SELF-FULFILLING PROPHECY.
>> Reporter: RWANDA'S PUBLIC
SECTOR HAS WON HIGH MARKS FOR
BEING LARGELY FREE OF
CORRUPTION.
ITS PERHAPS THE ONLY NATION,
DROBAC SAYS, WHERE U.S.
GOVERNMENT AID FOR H.I.V. AIDS
DRUGS GOES DIRECTLY TO THE
GOVERNMENT BECAUSE IT IS
TRUSTED.
>> WHERE RATHER THAN ALL OF THE
AID GOING THROUGH NON-
GOVERNMENTAL SUBCONTRACTORS,
NON-PROFITS AND FOR-PROFITS THAT
TAKE 30, 40, 50% OF THE OVERHEAD
AND THEN IMPLEMENT PROGRAMS, THE
MONEY'S GOING DIRECTLY TO THE
GOVERNMENT.
>> Reporter: THE BUTARO HOSPITAL
IS ALSO PART OF AN EFFORT TO
LOOK BEYOND INFECTIOUS DISEASES,
WHICH HAVE LONG DOMINATED PUBLIC
HEALTH EFFORTS IN POOR COUNTRIES
TO NON COMMUNICABLE DISEASES.
>> HYPERTENSION, CARDIAC
FAILURE, ALSO DIABETES.
>> Reporter: AND MEDICAL
DIRECTOR DOCTOR MPUNDA THARCISSE
SAYS IN ITS FIRST YEAR OF
OPERATION, THE HOSPITAL HAS
TREATED MORE THAN 1,500 CANCER
PATIENTS.
>> THIS IS THE CANCER WARD
>> Reporter: SO THIS IS THE ONLY
PLACE IN RWANDA WHERE PEOPLE
WITHOUT MEANS, POOR PEOPLE, CAN
GET TREATMENT FOR CANCER?
>> THAT'S TRUE
>> Reporter: FOR THE FIRST TIME
PATIENTS IN A PUBLIC HOSPITAL
ARE ABLE TO RECEIVE
CHEMOTHERAPY.
FOR NOW THE EXPENSIVE DRUGS ARE
PAID FOR BY PARTNERS IN HEALTH.
IT MEANS A NEW LEASE ON LIFE FOR
PATIENTS LIKE FOUR-YEAR-OLD
YVETTE, BEING TREATED FOR KIDNEY
CANCER.
AND FOR BERNADETTE, A 35-YEAR-
OLD MOTHER OF FOUR, WHO
UNDERWENT A MASTECTOMY FOR
BREAST CANCER.
>> ( translated ): IT WAS VERY
DIFFICULT THEN THEY FIRST TOLD
ME IT WAS CANCER, BECAUSE IN MY
MIND, CANCER MEANT DEATH.
BUT THE DOCTORS WERE BY MY SIDE,
THEY KEPT TELLING ME THINGS WILL
BE OKAY.
I THOUGHT I WAS GOING TO DIE
AFTER THE OPERATION.
I HAD BAD REACTIONS TO THE
MEDICINE, I HAD PAINS IN MY
CHEST.
BUT NOW I'M LIVING A NEW LIFE
>> Reporter: HER A NEW LIFE
MIGHT BE A METAPHOR FOR THE NEW,
POST GENOCIDE RWANDA.
RESURGENT AFTER A NEAR-DEATH
EXPERIENCE WITH A LONG JOURNEY
AHEAD.
>> Ifill: FRED'S REPORTING IS A
PARTNERSHIP WITH THE UNDER-TOLD
STORIES PROJECT AT SAINT MARY'S
UNIVERSITY IN MINNESOTA.
>> Woodruff: NOW TO COMBATING
OBESITY AND PROMOTING NUTRITION
AMONG AMERICAN CHILDREN.
FIRST LADY MICHELLE OBAMA HAS
MADE HEALTHY EATING,
PARTICULARLY IN SCHOOLS, HER TOP
PUBLIC PRIORITY.
BUT AFTER HEARING FROM SOME
SCHOOL DISTRICTS ABOUT THE
COMPLICATIONS IN IMPLEMENTING
THE NEW PROGRAM, REPUBLICANS ARE
NOW PUSHING TO ROLL BACK THE
REGULATIONS.
IN RECENT WEEKS, THE ISSUE OF
PUBLIC SCHOOL LUNCH STANDARDS
HAS TURNED INTO A POLITICAL FOOD
FIGHT IN WASHINGTON.
FIRST LADY MICHELLE OBAMA HAS
MADE FIGHTING CHILDHOOD OBESITY
A PRIORITY AND ON TUESDAY, SHE
CRITICIZED HOUSE REPUBLICANS WHO
ARE TRYING TO SCALE BACK
NUTRITION GUIDELINES SHE
CHAMPIONED.
>> THIS IS UNACCEPTABLE.
IT'S UNACCEPTABLE TO ME NOT JUST
AS FIRST LADY, BUT AS A MOTHER.
>> Woodruff: THE NEW STANDARDS
TOOK EFFECT UNDER THE 2010
"HEALTHY HUNGER-FREE KIDS ACT."
THEY REQUIRE SCHOOLS TO USE MORE
WHOLE GRAINS AND FRESH FRUIT IN
MEALS.
AND THEY SET LIMITS ON THE
AMOUNT OF FAT, SUGAR AND SODIUM
IN FOOD ITEMS.
>> THE LAST THING THAT WE CAN
AFFORD TO DO RIGHT NOW IS PLAY
POLITICS WITH OUR KIDS HEALTH,
ESPECIALLY WHEN WE'RE FINALLY
STARTING TO SEE SOME PROGRESS ON
THIS ISSUE.
WE'RE STARTING TO MOVE THE CURVE
ON THIS.
>> Woodruff: BUT REPUBLICANS,
SIDING WITH SOME SCHOOL
NUTRITION PROFESSIONALS AND FOOD
COMPANIES, ARGUE TOO MANY
STUDENTS WON'T EAT THE NEW LUNCH
OFFERINGS, AND SAY SCHOOLS ARE
HAVING A HARD TIME PAYING FOR
THE STANDARDS.
THEY'VE PROPOSED A ONE-YEAR
WAIVER.
ALABAMA REPUBLICAN ROBERT
ADERHOLT MADE THE CASE AT A
MARK-UP TODAY OF THE AGRICULTURE
APPROPRIATIONS BILL.
SCHOOLS ARE FINDING THE
REGULATIONS TO BE TOO MUCH AND
TOO QUICK.
SCHOOL DISTRICTS NEED MORE TIME
TO IMPLEMENT THE CHANGES.
>> Woodruff: THE WAIVER MEASURE
IS EXPECTED TO WIN APPROVAL IN
THE HOUSE BUT IS UNLIKELY TO
PASS IN THE DEMOCRATIC
CONTROLLED SENATE.
AND WITH US NOW TO DISCUSS ALL
THIS IS, MARK BISHOP OF THE
HEALTHY SCHOOLS CAMPAIGN, WHO IS
A SUPPORTER OF THE WHITE HOUSE'S
EFFORTS.
AND JON DICKL, WHO SERVES ON THE
BOARD OF THE SCHOOL NUTRITION
ASSOCIATION AND ALSO IS THE
DIRECTOR OF SCHOOL NUTRITION FOR
THE KNOX COUNTY SCHOOLS IN
KNOXVILLE, TENNESSEE.
HE BELIEVES THERE NEEDS TO BE
MORE FLEXIBILITY.
>> WE WELCOME YOU BOTH TO
THE PROGRAM.
>> JOHN, LET ME START WITH
YOU.
I THINK WE CAN STIPULATE
BOTH OF YOU BELIEVE CHILDREN
SHOULD BE EATING NUTRITIOUS
FOOD.
SO MY QUESTION TO YOU IS
WHAT IS THE PROBLEM WITH THE
STANDARDS AS THEY ARE LAID
DOWN NOW?
>> CURRENTLY ITS STANDARDS
ARE SUFFERING FROM
INFLEXIBILITY.
AND WHAT IT'S DOING IS IT'S
CAUSING A LOT OF DISTRICTS
NATIONWIDE TO STRUGGLE TO
MEET THEIR FINANCIAL
REQUIREMENTS AND ALSO TO
SERVE MEALS THAT THE
STUDENTS ARE FINDING PAL
ATABLE.
SPECIFICALLY FINDING ISSUES
WITH WHOLE GRAINS, WITH THE
SODIUM TARGETS AND POTENTIAL
RULINGS ON SMART SNACKS
COMING DOWN.
>> LET'S TALK SPECIFICS.
WHAT'S THE PROBLEM WITH WHL
GRAIN.
>> THE CURRENT REQUIREMENTS
THAT WE HAVE RIGHT NOW IS
THAT 50% OF ALL OF OUR WHOLE
GRAINS NEED TO BE ENRICHED
WITH 50% WHOLE GRAIN OR
GREATER THIS HAS BEEN A GOOD
MOVE AND WE'RE APPLAUDING
THAT MOVE AND WE'RE HAPPY
WHERE WE ARE RIGHT NOW.
WHAT WE'RE FINDING IS
STUDENTS ARE FINDING SOME
ITEMS ACCEPTABLE.
AND OTHER ITEMS ARE A LITTLE
MORE CHALLENGING.
SO FOR EXAMPLE, IN THE
SOUTHWEST PART OF THE
COUNTRY, THEY ARE STRUGGLING
WITH WHOLE GRAIN FLOUR
TORTILLAS.
THE STUDENTS DON'T FIND THEM
AS ACCEPTABLE IN THAT PART
OF THE COUNTRY BECAUSE IT IS
PART OF THEIR CULTURE.
IN THE SOUTHEAST WE HAVE THE
SAME PROBLEM WITH WHOLE
GRAIN BUSINESS QUITS AND
STUDENTS FINDS THEM LESS
ACCEPTABLE HERE.
THE FDA CAME OUT ON A WAIVER
FOR WHOLE GRAIN PASTA THAT
WILL ALLOW FOR A TWO YEAR
EXEMPTION IF DISTRICTS
QUALIFY AND MEET THE
REQUIREMENTS OF THAT WAIVER.
WE APPLAUD THAT BECAUSE IT
WILL ALLOW FOR ADDITIONAL
FLEXIBILITY FOR DISTRICTS
BECAUSE WHOLE GRAIN PASTA
HAS BEEN A REAL CHALLENGE TO
BE ABLE TO FIND A PASTA THAT
WILL HOLD UP UNDER COOKING
THAT HAS APPROPRIATE COLOR
AND TEXTURE.
>> LET ME STOP YOU THERE,
MARK BISHOP.
WHEN THEIR ARGUMENT IS THAT
YOU CAN'T COOK SOME WHOLE
GAIN PASTA TO BE AS TASTY
AND APPEALING TO KIDS AS
OTHERS, WHAT ABOUT THAT
ARGUMENT?
>> YOU KNOW, FIRST OF ALL, I
HAVE NO EN-- ENVY FOR THE
JOB OF SERVICE DIRECTOR T IS
TIRELESS WORK, YOU HAVE TO
MAKE FOOD ON PENNIES.
SO IT'S CHALLENGING, IT'S
HARD WORK AND I HAVE THE
GREATEST RESPECT FOR THE
WORK THAT THEY DO.
HOWEVER, FLEXIBILITY IS
SOMETHING THAT WE ACTUALLY
HAVE AN AGREEMENT ON.
FLEXIBILITY IS IMPORTANT.
WE THINK THAT SO FAR THE U.
USDA HAS SHOWN TREMENDOUS
FLEXIBILITY.
>> THIS IS THE AGRICULTURE
DEPARTMENT.
>> YES, THE AGRICULTURAL
IN ADDITION TO THE WHOLE
DEPARTMENT.
GAIN GRAINS, THEY, THE
IN ADDITION TO THE WHOLE
RULING THEY JUST PUT FORWARD,
GAIN GRAINS, THEY, THE
THEY ALSO SET, THEY CHANGED
RULING THEY JUST PUT FORWARD,
HOW THE PRO-- PROTEINS ARE
THEY ALSO SET, THEY CHANGED
GOING TO BE IMPLEMENTED
HOW THE PRO-- PROTEINS ARE
THERE ARE A LOT OF THINGS
GOING TO BE IMPLEMENTED
THEY ARE WORKING WITH
THERE ARE A LOT OF THINGS
SCHOOLS TO MAKE SURE
THEY ARE WORKING WITH
IMPLEMENTATION WORKS BETTER.
SCHOOLS TO MAKE SURE
>> I DO WANT TO STICK WITH
IMPLEMENTATION WORKS BETTER.
THE ARGUMENTS FROM THE
>> I DO WANT TO STICK WITH
SCHOOL, THE FOLKS WHO RUN
THE ARGUMENTS FROM THE
THE SCHOOL LUNCH PROGRAM,
SCHOOL, THE FOLKS WHO RUN
SCHOOL BREAKFAST PROGRAM,
THE SCHOOL LUNCH PROGRAM,
LIKE MR. DICEL WHO SAY THAT
SCHOOL BREAKFAST PROGRAM,
IT IS HARD TO GET FOODS,
LIKE MR. DICEL WHO SAY THAT
THAT MEET THESE STANDARDS
IT IS HARD TO GET FOODS,
AND THAT CHILDREN WILL EAT.
THAT MEET THESE STANDARDS
>> YEAH.
AND THAT CHILDREN WILL EAT.
>> WELL, THERE ARE, YOU KNOW,
>> YEAH.
THERE'S MORE TO THE SCHOOL
>> WELL, THERE ARE, YOU KNOW,
FOOD PROGRAM THAT THAN JUST
THERE'S MORE TO THE SCHOOL
THE FOOD BEING SERVED.
FOOD PROGRAM THAT THAN JUST
BUT AFTER THE FOOD THERE ARE
THE FOOD BEING SERVED.
ORGANIZATIONS THAT WE LOOK
BUT AFTER THE FOOD THERE ARE
TO THAT CAN PROVIDE
ORGANIZATIONS THAT WE LOOK
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT,
TO THAT CAN PROVIDE
BEST PRACTISE AND HELP US
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT,
IDENTIFY BETTER PRODUCTS
BEST PRACTISE AND HELP US
WHETHER IT'S THE FOOD
IDENTIFY BETTER PRODUCTS
MANAGEMENT SERVICE INSTITUTE,
WHETHER IT'S THE FOOD
SCHOOL FOOD FOCUS.
MANAGEMENT SERVICE INSTITUTE,
A LOT OF GREAT RESOURCES TO
SCHOOL FOOD FOCUS.
HELP SCHOOLS.
A LOT OF GREAT RESOURCES TO
THERE IS ALSO THE FOOD
HELP SCHOOLS.
INDUSTRY THAT IS
THERE IS ALSO THE FOOD
REFORMULATING PRODUCT OS.
INDUSTRY THAT IS
>> YOU MEAN IN A HEALTHIER
REFORMULATING PRODUCT OS.
DIRECTION.
>> YOU MEAN IN A HEALTHIER
>> IN A HEALTHIER DIRECTION.
DIRECTION.
ADDING WHOLE GRAINS.
>> IN A HEALTHIER DIRECTION.
THE USDA MOVE IS ALLOWING
ADDING WHOLE GRAINS.
THE INDUSTRY TO ADAPT AND
THE USDA MOVE IS ALLOWING
CREATE PRODUCTS THAT WORK
THE INDUSTRY TO ADAPT AND
BETTER.
CREATE PRODUCTS THAT WORK
>> IS THAT SOMETHING THAT'S
BETTER.
GOING TO MAKE IT POSSIBLE TO
>> IS THAT SOMETHING THAT'S
MEET THESE STANDARDS?
GOING TO MAKE IT POSSIBLE TO
>> I THINK, I ANY RIGHT NOW
MEET THESE STANDARDS?
WE HAVE MOVED SO FAR SO FAST
>> I THINK, I ANY RIGHT NOW
THAT REALLY WHAT WE NEED TO
WE HAVE MOVED SO FAR SO FAST
LOOK AT IS MANUFACTURING IN
THAT REALLY WHAT WE NEED TO
MANY OF THE MANUFACTURING
LOOK AT IS MANUFACTURING IN
SEGMENTS NEED TO GET CAUGHT
MANY OF THE MANUFACTURING
UP.
SEGMENTS NEED TO GET CAUGHT
YOU HAVE 55,000 MEMBERS IN
UP.
OUR ASSOCIATION THAT WE'RE
YOU HAVE 55,000 MEMBERS IN
TRYING TO WORK WITH.
OUR ASSOCIATION THAT WE'RE
BUT WHAT WE'RE SEEING IS A
TRYING TO WORK WITH.
LOT OF STRUGGLES.
BUT WHAT WE'RE SEEING IS A
EVEN USDA FOODS THAT ARE
LOT OF STRUGGLES.
AVAILABLE TO SCHOOL DISTRICT,
EVEN USDA FOODS THAT ARE
USDA HAS COME OUT WITH SOME
AVAILABLE TO SCHOOL DISTRICT,
NEW ITEMS LOWER IN SODIUM.
USDA HAS COME OUT WITH SOME
THREE YEARS AGO I GOT UP AND
NEW ITEMS LOWER IN SODIUM.
SPOKE AT A LEGISLATIVE
THREE YEARS AGO I GOT UP AND
ACTION AND SPOKE ABOUT THE
SPOKE AT A LEGISLATIVE
USDA FOODS AND THE SODIUM
ACTION AND SPOKE ABOUT THE
TARGETS THAT ARE DESIRED FOR
USDA FOODS AND THE SODIUM
2022 WHICH WOULD LIMIT
TARGETS THAT ARE DESIRED FOR
GRADES K THROUGH 5 TO 640
2022 WHICH WOULD LIMIT
MILL IRGRAMS OF SODIUM AND I
GRADES K THROUGH 5 TO 640
TOOK EVERY NEW ITEM THAT
MILL IRGRAMS OF SODIUM AND I
THEY HAD MENTIONED AND WHEN
TOOK EVERY NEW ITEM THAT
I TOLD THEM THE NEW SODIUM
THEY HAD MENTIONED AND WHEN
LOWER SODIUM ITEMS WERE
I TOLD THEM THE NEW SODIUM
ABOUT A THOUSAND MILLIGRAMS
LOWER SODIUM ITEMS WERE
OF SODIUM, SO THE SODIUM
ABOUT A THOUSAND MILLIGRAMS
TARGETS ARE VIRTUALLY
OF SODIUM, SO THE SODIUM
UNACHIEVABLE.
TARGETS ARE VIRTUALLY
>> LET ME COME BACK ON THAT.
UNACHIEVABLE.
>> SURE.
>> LET ME COME BACK ON THAT.
>> FOOD MAY NOT TASTE AS
>> SURE.
GOOD TO THESE CHILDREN
>> FOOD MAY NOT TASTE AS
WITHOUT SOME SALT.
GOOD TO THESE CHILDREN
>> IN SOME WAYS WE HAVE TO
WITHOUT SOME SALT.
ENGAGE STUDENTS WITH WHERE
>> IN SOME WAYS WE HAVE TO
THEY ARE AT.
ENGAGE STUDENTS WITH WHERE
DO TASTE TESTING, BRING THEM
THEY ARE AT.
TO HELP THEM UNDERSTAND WHAT
DO TASTE TESTING, BRING THEM
THE MENU CHANGES ARE.
TO HELP THEM UNDERSTAND WHAT
WE KNOW IN CHICAGO, ONE OF
THE MENU CHANGES ARE.
THEIR SODIUM REDUCTION
WE KNOW IN CHICAGO, ONE OF
STRATEGIES IS TO IMPLEMENT A
THEIR SODIUM REDUCTION
FARM TO SCHOOL PROGRAM WHERE
STRATEGIES IS TO IMPLEMENT A
THEY ARE BRINGING IN MORE
FARM TO SCHOOL PROGRAM WHERE
LOCAL AND FRESHER FOOD THAT
THEY ARE BRINGING IN MORE
IN MANY WAYS WILL ACTUALLY
LOCAL AND FRESHER FOOD THAT
TASTE BETTER EVEN KNOW IT
IN MANY WAYS WILL ACTUALLY
DOESN'T HAVE THAT SODIUM
TASTE BETTER EVEN KNOW IT
KPONNESS THAT I WOULD FIND
DOESN'T HAVE THAT SODIUM
IN A CANNED VEGETABLE
KPONNESS THAT I WOULD FIND
PRODUCT.
IN A CANNED VEGETABLE
>> IS THAT SOMETHING YOU CAN
PRODUCT.
DO ALL OVER THE COUNTRY,
>> IS THAT SOMETHING YOU CAN
MR. DICEL?
DO ALL OVER THE COUNTRY,
>> THAT'S SOMETHING THAT'S
MR. DICEL?
BEING DONE ALL OVER THE
>> THAT'S SOMETHING THAT'S
COUNTRY CURRENTLY.
BEING DONE ALL OVER THE
WE HAVE HAD A FARM TO SCHOOL
COUNTRY CURRENTLY.
PROGRAM FOR OVER THREE YEARS
WE HAVE HAD A FARM TO SCHOOL
AND A LOT OF MY COUNTERPARTS
PROGRAM FOR OVER THREE YEARS
NATIONWIDE ARE DOING FARM TO
AND A LOT OF MY COUNTERPARTS
SCHOOL.
NATIONWIDE ARE DOING FARM TO
WE HAVE SOME FOLKS DOING
SCHOOL.
SOME REALLY EXCELLENT
WE HAVE SOME FOLKS DOING
CREATIVE IDEAS.
SOME REALLY EXCELLENT
A LOT OF FOLKS ARE LOOKING
CREATIVE IDEAS.
TO SOLID ALTERNATIVES.
A LOT OF FOLKS ARE LOOKING
WE DO A LOT OF OUR RECIPES
TO SOLID ALTERNATIVES.
ARE DONE WITH A SEA SALT POT
WE DO A LOT OF OUR RECIPES
AMUOUS CHLORIDE SUBSTITUTE
ARE DONE WITH A SEA SALT POT
TO BE ABLE TO FIND FOOD AND
AMUOUS CHLORIDE SUBSTITUTE
ITEMS.
TO BE ABLE TO FIND FOOD AND
A LOT OF FRESH HERBS.
ITEMS.
>> YOUR POINT SU NEED MORE
A LOT OF FRESH HERBS.
FLEXIBILITY THAT YOU WOULD
>> YOUR POINT SU NEED MORE
EVENTUALLY GO ALONG WITH
FLEXIBILITY THAT YOU WOULD
THESE STANDARDS, YOU WANT
EVENTUALLY GO ALONG WITH
MORE TIME.
THESE STANDARDS, YOU WANT
>> ABSOLUTELY.
MORE TIME.
WE'RE ALREADY HONORING THE
>> ABSOLUTELY.
STANDARDS AS THEY'RE WRITTEN
WE'RE ALREADY HONORING THE
BUT NEXT SCHOOL YEAR YOU'RE
STANDARDS AS THEY'RE WRITTEN
TALKING ALL GRAINS HAVE TO
BUT NEXT SCHOOL YEAR YOU'RE
BE 100% WHOLE GRAIN.
TALKING ALL GRAINS HAVE TO
ALL GRAINS WE OFFER HAVE TO
BE 100% WHOLE GRAIN.
BE 50% OR GREATER WHOLE
ALL GRAINS WE OFFER HAVE TO
GRAINS NEXT YEAR THERE IS NO
BE 50% OR GREATER WHOLE
FLEXIBILITY NEXT YEAR.
GRAINS NEXT YEAR THERE IS NO
SO I WON'T BE ABLE TO OFFER
FLEXIBILITY NEXT YEAR.
NONWHOLE GRAIN BREAD ITEMS
SO I WON'T BE ABLE TO OFFER
NEXT YEAR.
NONWHOLE GRAIN BREAD ITEMS
FROM 2017 THEY ARE MUCH MORE
NEXT YEAR.
RESTRICTIVE AND 2022 WILL
FROM 2017 THEY ARE MUCH MORE
MUCH MORE RESTRICTIVE.
RESTRICTIVE AND 2022 WILL
>> WHY CAN'T THERE BE A
MUCH MORE RESTRICTIVE.
LITTLE MORE FLEXIBILITY.
>> WHY CAN'T THERE BE A
>> I THINK THERE IS A LOT OF
LITTLE MORE FLEXIBILITY.
FLEXIBILITY.
>> I THINK THERE IS A LOT OF
THE USDA HAS SHOWN A
FLEXIBILITY.
CONSIDERABLE EFFORT TO WORK
THE USDA HAS SHOWN A
WITH SCHOOLS.
CONSIDERABLE EFFORT TO WORK
THE WHOLE GRAINS AND THE
WITH SCHOOLS.
PROTEIN ARE PERFECT POINTS
THE WHOLE GRAINS AND THE
TO HOW THIS FLEXIBILITY IS
PROTEIN ARE PERFECT POINTS
HAPPENING.
TO HOW THIS FLEXIBILITY IS
AND AGAIN TO ADDRESS THESE
HAPPENING.
CHALLENGES IS NOT ABOUT
AND AGAIN TO ADDRESS THESE
GUTTING THE STANDARDS.
CHALLENGES IS NOT ABOUT
IT'S ABOUT FIGURING OUT WHAT
GUTTING THE STANDARDS.
FLEXIBILITY WORKS AND THEN
IT'S ABOUT FIGURING OUT WHAT
ENGAGING STUDENTS AND
FLEXIBILITY WORKS AND THEN
FIGURING OUT HOW TO GET DONE
ENGAGING STUDENTS AND
BETTER.
FIGURING OUT HOW TO GET DONE
>> COULD YOU ADDRESS THAT
BETTER.
QUICK.
>> COULD YOU ADDRESS THAT
>> YOU KEEP HEARING THIS
QUICK.
ABOUT GUTTING THE PROGRAM
>> YOU KEEP HEARING THIS
THIS IS NOT AN ATTEMPT TO
ABOUT GUTTING THE PROGRAM
GUT THE PROGRAM.
THIS IS NOT AN ATTEMPT TO
OUR ORGANIZATION HAS BEEN
GUT THE PROGRAM.
SERVING KIDS HEALTHY MEALS
OUR ORGANIZATION HAS BEEN
FOR ABOUT 70 YEARS THIS IS
SERVING KIDS HEALTHY MEALS
ABOUT MEETING THE
FOR ABOUT 70 YEARS THIS IS
REGULATIONS WHERE THEY
ABOUT MEETING THE
CURRENTLY ARE WHICH IS WELL
REGULATIONS WHERE THEY
BEYOND WHERE THEY WERE
CURRENTLY ARE WHICH IS WELL
SEVERAL YEARS AGO THIS IS
BEYOND WHERE THEY WERE
JUST ANOTHER ATTEMPT FOR US
SEVERAL YEARS AGO THIS IS
TO BE ABLE TO MEET THE NEEDS
JUST ANOTHER ATTEMPT FOR US
OF OUR MEMBERS AND TO SERVE
TO BE ABLE TO MEET THE NEEDS
THE STUDENTS NATIONWIDE A
OF OUR MEMBERS AND TO SERVE
HEALTHY MEAL.
THE STUDENTS NATIONWIDE A
>> AND WE DO HEAR YOU BOTH.
HEALTHY MEAL.
JONATHAN IN KNOXVILLE, MARK
>> AND WE DO HEAR YOU BOTH.
BISHOP, WE THANK YOU BOTH.
JONATHAN IN KNOXVILLE, MARK
>> THANK YOU.
BISHOP, WE THANK YOU BOTH.
>> THANK YOU
>> Ifill: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
THE WHITE HOUSE SAID PRESIDENT
OBAMA WILL MAKE NO DECISION
ABOUT VETERANS AFFAIRS SECRETARY
ERIC SHINSEKI UNTIL A FULL
INVESTIGATION OF DELAYS IN CARE
AT V.A. HOSPITALS.
AND PRO-RUSSIAN REBELS IN
EASTERN UKRAINE SHOT DOWN A
MILITARY HELICOPTER, KILLING AT
LEAST 12 PEOPLE.
>> Woodruff: ON THE NEWSHOUR
ONLINE RIGHT NOW, IN HER NEW
BOOK "THE BURGLARY," JOURNALIST
BETTY MEDSGER TELLS THE STORY OF
AN UNLIKELY GROUP IN THE 1970'S
WHO STOLE F.B.I. FILES THAT
PROVIDED EVIDENCE OF WIDE-SCALE
SURVEILLANCE OF U.S. CITIZENS.
JEFFREY BROWN TALKED TO THE
AUTHOR.
YOU CAN WATCH THAT CONVERSATION,
ON ART BEAT.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
SITE, newshour.pbs.org.
>> Ifill: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
ON FRIDAY, JEFFREY BROWN SITS
DOWN WITH OPERA LEGEND JESSYE
NORMAN.
I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
WE'LL SEE YOU ON-LINE AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING WITH MARK
SHIELDS AND DAVID BROOKS AMONG
OTHERS.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.